In this lecture, you'll learn about Adjacencies and Passive Interfaces.
Our Interior Gateway routing protocols, so RIP, EIGRP, and OSPF, are configured under global configuration. And then, they're either
enabled or not on the router's individual interfaces. When the routing protocol is enabled on an interface,
the router will look for other devices on that directly connected link, which are also running the routing
protocol in order to peer with them. The router does this by sending out and listening for hello packets for
that particular routing protocol.
When a matching peer is found, the routers form an adjacency with each other and exchange routing
updates with each other.
Modern routing protocols use multicast for the hello packets.
This is more efficient than broadcast that was used by earlier protocols, like RIP version 1. With
multicast,
it's specific to the particular routing protocol. So, a device is only going to process that packet if
it's interested in forming an adjacency with that routing protocol. Unlike broadcast traffic that has to be
processed by all hosts,
so it's more efficient. Okay, an adjacency example.
So here, we've got router R1 in the middle, and RA, RB, and RC. On R1, we got a loopback configured
there with IP address
192.168.1.1/32.
The IP subnets configured on the interfaces, which are enabled for routing protocol, will of course be included
in its routing protocol updates. For example, R1 here
has a routing protocol enabled on the Loopback0 interface and interfaces FastEthernet0/0,
and FastEthernet1/0,
but it is not enabled on FastEthernet2/0.
The reason we've done that is that RC belongs to a partner organization, and we need connectivity to them,
but we don't want to be sending internal network information to them.
That would be a security issue.
R1 will send out and listen for hello packets on the Loopback0 interface, FastEthernet0/0, and FastEthernet1/0
because those are the interfaces that we enabled the routing protocol on.
And it will form adjacencies with any routers that are running that same routing protocol that it finds
on those links.
So in this case, we've also enabled the routing protocol on RA and on RB, on the interfaces that are
facing R1. So the routers will discover each other through the hello packets, and they will then form an adjacency
and share routing updates. But R1 will not send out or listen for hello packets on fastEthernet2/0,
because we didn't enable the roouting protocol on that interface. So, it will not form
an adjacency with RC. It's not going to be giving out any network information to RC. So in the example
here where RC is a partner, we need to have connectivity to them but we're not going to be giving
them out internal information. In that case, we could use static routes between us and them just to give
very limited connectivity.
An adjacency example, so the same one, R1 will advertise its IP subnets
to RA and RB, because it formed adjacencies with them. So it will advertise the
10.0.0.0/24 subnet,
10.0.1.0/24, and 192.168.1.1/32,
it's loopback. But it will not advertise 10.0.2.0/24, because that interface
was not included in the routing protocol. When you enable a routing protocol globally and then you enable
it on an interface,
the router will try to form an adjacency on that interface by sending out hello packets and it will also
advertise the subnet that is on that interface as well.
But if an interface is not included in the routing protocol, then the router won't send hello packets out
there, and also it won't advertise the subnet configured on that link to other routers either.
So in our scenario here, we're not going to be sending information to RC, but also RA and RB
will not learn routes to 10.0.2.0/24, because we didn't include it in the routing protocol.
So, what if we do actually need RA and RB to learn a route to get to 10.0.2.0/24?
That's where passive interfaces come in.
Passive interfaces allow you to include an IP subnet in the routing protocol without sending updates out of
the interface.
So here,
if fastEthernet2/0 is configured as a passive interface, RA and RB will learn routes
to 10.0.2.0, but internal network information will not be sent out to RC. So, that's what we wanted
to do in this situation. It's best practice to configure your loopback interfaces as passive interfaces
always.
So, this has nothing to do with giving out network information on them.
This is because it's impossible to form an adjacency on a loopback interface.
It's impossible for another router to be directly connected to the loopback interface, because it's not a physical
interface. It's just logical,
so there's no way we're going to ever form an adjacency on a loopback. Making the loopback
passive means that it will be advertised by the routing protocol.
We want to do that. We want other routers to learn how to get to the loopback, but we don't want to waste
resources sending out and listening for hello packets when we know
that there's never going to be another router connected in on that link.
So, this makes things more efficient.
Always make your loopbacks passive interface. So the use cases for passive interfaces, to summarize
that, we use them on our loopback interfaces. And also, physical interfaces
where the device on the other side belongs to another organization, or maybe it's not another organization, but
the device on the other side,
we don't want to send routing information out to it, but we do want our other internal devices to know about
that link.
Okay,
so that was the theory for our passive interfaces.
Let's actually configure them in the lab.
We'll do that in the next lecture.